docs/index.md, before:

# dalymi

_[data like you mean it]_

[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/dalymi/badge/?version=latest)](http://dalymi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

A lightweight, data-focused and non-opinionated pipeline manager written in and for Python.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

_dalymi_ allows to build data processing pipelines as [directed acyclic graphs]([https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph]) (DAGs).<br>
DAG nodes (or "tasks") are vanilla Python functions with a certain call signature and decorators to specify task dependencies. Task dependencies (DAG edges) are defined implicitly by specifying interim data as inputs and outputs of tasks. Hence, tasks are only executed after input data has been generated by upstream tasks.

_dalymi_ aims for rapid prototyping and minimal setup for data-processing projects.<br>
Several features facilitate this goal:

- simple, non-opinionated API (most choices left to user)
- no external dependencies for pipeline execution
- one-line installation
- no configuration
- auto-generated command line interface for pipeline execution
- DAG visualization using [graphviz](https://www.graphviz.org/)
- API design encourages good development practices (modular code, defined data schemas, code-inherent docs, easy workflow viz, etc.)

## Installation

```bash
pip install dalymi
```

For the latest development:

```bash
pip install git+https://github.com/joschnitzbauer/dalymi.git
```

DAG visualization requires [graphviz](https://www.graphviz.org/).

## Tutorial

!!! note
    The full source code for the example in this tutorial can be found at [`dalymi/examples/simple.py`](https://github.com/joschnitzbauer/dalymi/blob/master/examples/simple.py). Further examples can be found in the same folder.

_dalymi_ programs consist of two main components: resources and tasks. Tasks create resources and use them as input. Hence, a _dalymi_ DAG can be described as a graph of tasks and resources where tasks are dependent on the resources that they need.

In this tutorial, we will create the following DAG:

![Simple DAG](img/simple.png)

!!! note
    The above image was generated by the _dalymi_ graph plot command line interface and [graphviz](https://www.graphviz.org/):
    `python examples/simple.py dot` followed by `dot -Tpng pipeline.dot -o pipeline.png`.

In this graph, ellipses represent tasks and rectangles resources. The first row of rectangles give the name of this resource. If the resource is a tabular data frame (e.g. a `pandas.DataFrame`) and columns have been specified, then the remaining rows indicate the expected columns in this resource.

Hence, we can see that the task `create_numbers` produces a resource `numbers` which has a single column called `number`. `numbers` in return is being used by a task `square_numbers` as an input. Finally, `square_numbers` produces an output resource `squares` with columns `number` and `square`.

Upon execution of this DAG, _dalymi_ attempts to run each task, but will only execute them if the input resources exist. If an input resource does not exist, _dalymi_ will attempt to execute the producing task and revisit the unexecuted task later.

To define the above pipeline, let's import everything we need first:

```python
from dalymi import Pipeline
from dalymi.resources import PandasCSV
import pandas as pd
```

We are using a `Pipeline` object to represent the whole pipeline and `PandasCSV` objects for Pandas data frame resources stores as CSV files. We also import `pandas` itself for later use.

Next, we define the resources in our pipeline:

```python
numbers_resource = PandasCSV(name='numbers', loc='numbers.csv', columns=['number'])
squares_resource = PandasCSV(name='squares', loc='squares.csv', columns=['number', 'square'])
```

Here, we specify a unique name for each resource, the location where they should be stored (`loc`) and the columns we expect (`columns`).

!!! note
    Columns do not need to be specified for data frame resources (in this case, use `columns=None`), but it is highly encouraged for disciplined coding and self-documented code. The integrated `dot` command can visualize the columns in each resource when specified, allowing for quick and easy documentation.

Now, we are ready to define the pipeline tasks. Here we go:

```python
pl = Pipeline()


@pl.output(numbers_resource)
def create_numbers(**context):
    return pd.DataFrame({'number': range(11)})


@pl.output(squares_resource)
@pl.input(numbers_resource)
def square_numbers(numbers, **context):
    numbers['square'] = numbers['number']**2
    return numbers
```

Pipeline tasks are simple Python functions (`create_numbers` and `square_numbers`), decorated with either `Pipeline.input`, `Pipeline.output` or both.<br>
Positional arguments of the `output` decorator are matched to the returned objects of the task function. For example: in `create_numbers`, the returned data frame is interpreted as the `numbers_resource`. The `output` decorator checks the returned objects for data integrity (in this case: do the columns match the expected?) and stores the object at the resource location (in this case: as a flat file called `numbers.csv`).<br>
Positional arguments of the `input` decorator are loaded from the resource location and injected into a `context` dictionary with the resource `name` as key and the object itself as value. Hence, each pipeline task must accept a `context` dictionary as keyword arguments. Adding positional arguments to an input-receiving pipeline function is a handy Python trick to extract the arguments elegantly from `context` (e.g. `numbers` is directly pulled from `context` in the definition of the `square_numbers` function).

`dalymi` provides an easy way to create command-line interfaces (CLIs) for pipelines. The default CLI is added to the above pipeline like this:

```python
if __name__ == '__main__':
    pl.cli()
```

Now, we can interact with the pipeline in the following way (assuming that above code is saved in a single file `simple.py`):

```bash
python simple.py run     # executes the pipeline. skips tasks for which output already exists.
python simple.py undo    # deletes any existing output resources of the pipeline.
python simple.py dot     # creates a dot file to create pipeline diagrams with graphviz.
```

Task execution can be controlled a bit finer with CLI arguments. For example:

```bash
python simple.py run --task square_numbers    # executes only `square_numbers` (and upstream requirements if needed).
python simple.py run -t square_numbers        # short for the line above
python simple.py ls                           # lists all tasks in the pipeline
python simple.py undo --task square_numbers   # deletes only the output of `square_numbers`
python simple.py undo -t square_numbers       # short for the line above
python simple.py undo -t square_numbers -d    # deletes the output of `square_numbers` and all downstream outputs
python simple.py undo -t square_numbers --downstream    # same as above
```

CLI commands and arguments are added to the `context` dictionary, so pipeline tasks can make use of them. Hence, the minimal `context dictionary` is:

```python
{'command': '{command}'}  # where {command} is one of `run`, `undo`, `ls`, `dot`
```

Depending on optional arguments, context may contain other CLI entries (by the argument's long version), such as:

```python
{'task': 'square_numbers',
 'downstream': True}
```

!!! note
    Extending the CLI with custom arguments allows for easy implementation of project-specific arguments (for example the execution date). Custom arguments will be automatically added to the context, so that they are available for all pipeline functions. Moreover, resource locations can be specified as templates which are filled with context variables during runtime. This allows for argument-specific resource storage. See [Recipes](recipes.md) for further details.

Commit message:

adding github link to docs index

docs/index.md, after:

# dalymi

_[data like you mean it]_

[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/dalymi/badge/?version=latest)](http://dalymi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

A lightweight, data-focused and non-opinionated pipeline manager written in and for Python.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

_dalymi_ allows to build data processing pipelines as [directed acyclic graphs]([https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph]) (DAGs).<br>
DAG nodes (or "tasks") are vanilla Python functions with a certain call signature and decorators to specify task dependencies. Task dependencies (DAG edges) are defined implicitly by specifying interim data as inputs and outputs of tasks. Hence, tasks are only executed after input data has been generated by upstream tasks.

_dalymi_ aims for rapid prototyping and minimal setup for data-processing projects.<br>
Several features facilitate this goal:

- simple, non-opinionated API (most choices left to user)
- no external dependencies for pipeline execution
- one-line installation
- no configuration
- auto-generated command line interface for pipeline execution
- DAG visualization using [graphviz](https://www.graphviz.org/)
- API design encourages good development practices (modular code, defined data schemas, code-inherent docs, easy workflow viz, etc.)

Check out the tutorial below or examples in the **[Github repository](https://github.com/joschnitzbauer/dalymi)** to get a
feel for _dalymi_.

## Installation

```bash
pip install dalymi
```

For the latest development:

```bash
pip install git+https://github.com/joschnitzbauer/dalymi.git
```

DAG visualization requires [graphviz](https://www.graphviz.org/).

## Tutorial

!!! note
    The full source code for the example in this tutorial can be found at [`dalymi/examples/simple.py`](https://github.com/joschnitzbauer/dalymi/blob/master/examples/simple.py). Further examples can be found in the same folder.

_dalymi_ programs consist of two main components: resources and tasks. Tasks create resources and use them as input. Hence, a _dalymi_ DAG can be described as a graph of tasks and resources where tasks are dependent on the resources that they need.

In this tutorial, we will create the following DAG:

![Simple DAG](img/simple.png)

!!! note
    The above image was generated by the _dalymi_ graph plot command line interface and [graphviz](https://www.graphviz.org/):
    `python examples/simple.py dot` followed by `dot -Tpng pipeline.dot -o pipeline.png`.

In this graph, ellipses represent tasks and rectangles resources. The first row of rectangles give the name of this resource. If the resource is a tabular data frame (e.g. a `pandas.DataFrame`) and columns have been specified, then the remaining rows indicate the expected columns in this resource.

Hence, we can see that the task `create_numbers` produces a resource `numbers` which has a single column called `number`. `numbers` in return is being used by a task `square_numbers` as an input. Finally, `square_numbers` produces an output resource `squares` with columns `number` and `square`.

Upon execution of this DAG, _dalymi_ attempts to run each task, but will only execute them if the input resources exist. If an input resource does not exist, _dalymi_ will attempt to execute the producing task and revisit the unexecuted task later.

To define the above pipeline, let's import everything we need first:

```python
from dalymi import Pipeline
from dalymi.resources import PandasCSV
import pandas as pd
```

We are using a `Pipeline` object to represent the whole pipeline and `PandasCSV` objects for Pandas data frame resources stores as CSV files. We also import `pandas` itself for later use.

Next, we define the resources in our pipeline:

```python
numbers_resource = PandasCSV(name='numbers', loc='numbers.csv', columns=['number'])
squares_resource = PandasCSV(name='squares', loc='squares.csv', columns=['number', 'square'])
```

Here, we specify a unique name for each resource, the location where they should be stored (`loc`) and the columns we expect (`columns`).

!!! note
    Columns do not need to be specified for data frame resources (in this case, use `columns=None`), but it is highly encouraged for disciplined coding and self-documented code. The integrated `dot` command can visualize the columns in each resource when specified, allowing for quick and easy documentation.

Now, we are ready to define the pipeline tasks. Here we go:

```python
pl = Pipeline()


@pl.output(numbers_resource)
def create_numbers(**context):
    return pd.DataFrame({'number': range(11)})


@pl.output(squares_resource)
@pl.input(numbers_resource)
def square_numbers(numbers, **context):
    numbers['square'] = numbers['number']**2
    return numbers
```

Pipeline tasks are simple Python functions (`create_numbers` and `square_numbers`), decorated with either `Pipeline.input`, `Pipeline.output` or both.<br>
Positional arguments of the `output` decorator are matched to the returned objects of the task function. For example: in `create_numbers`, the returned data frame is interpreted as the `numbers_resource`. The `output` decorator checks the returned objects for data integrity (in this case: do the columns match the expected?) and stores the object at the resource location (in this case: as a flat file called `numbers.csv`).<br>
Positional arguments of the `input` decorator are loaded from the resource location and injected into a `context` dictionary with the resource `name` as key and the object itself as value. Hence, each pipeline task must accept a `context` dictionary as keyword arguments. Adding positional arguments to an input-receiving pipeline function is a handy Python trick to extract the arguments elegantly from `context` (e.g. `numbers` is directly pulled from `context` in the definition of the `square_numbers` function).

`dalymi` provides an easy way to create command-line interfaces (CLIs) for pipelines. The default CLI is added to the above pipeline like this:

```python
if __name__ == '__main__':
    pl.cli()
```

Now, we can interact with the pipeline in the following way (assuming that above code is saved in a single file `simple.py`):

```bash
python simple.py run     # executes the pipeline. skips tasks for which output already exists.
python simple.py undo    # deletes any existing output resources of the pipeline.
python simple.py dot     # creates a dot file to create pipeline diagrams with graphviz.
```

Task execution can be controlled a bit finer with CLI arguments. For example:

```bash
python simple.py run --task square_numbers    # executes only `square_numbers` (and upstream requirements if needed).
python simple.py run -t square_numbers        # short for the line above
python simple.py ls                           # lists all tasks in the pipeline
python simple.py undo --task square_numbers   # deletes only the output of `square_numbers`
python simple.py undo -t square_numbers       # short for the line above
python simple.py undo -t square_numbers -d    # deletes the output of `square_numbers` and all downstream outputs
python simple.py undo -t square_numbers --downstream    # same as above
```

CLI commands and arguments are added to the `context` dictionary, so pipeline tasks can make use of them. Hence, the minimal `context dictionary` is:

```python
{'command': '{command}'}  # where {command} is one of `run`, `undo`, `ls`, `dot`
```

Depending on optional arguments, context may contain other CLI entries (by the argument's long version), such as:

```python
{'task': 'square_numbers',
 'downstream': True}
```

!!! note
    Extending the CLI with custom arguments allows for easy implementation of project-specific arguments (for example the execution date). Custom arguments will be automatically added to the context, so that they are available for all pipeline functions. Moreover, resource locations can be specified as templates which are filled with context variables during runtime. This allows for argument-specific resource storage. See [Recipes](recipes.md) for further details.
